---
layout: post
title: Mental health during a pandemic
---
The COVID-19 pandemic has shaken the planet in a way we have not witnessed in nearly a century, and even the parents of the folks reading this article weren't born back then! The last time the world was forced into isolation and quarantine was during the influenza pandemic at the end of World War I. This time around, we have more tools in our fight against diseases. Massive strides have been made in medicinal science and our understanding of the human body has undergone tectonic shifts, giving us all hope that a vaccine might be just around the corner, putting an end to our collective global nightmare. This article is not about those things though. It is about something much more personal, something that yours truly has been experiencing for the past year, and I am writing this in the hope that it might resonate with some of you, and let you know that you are not alone.

One of the things that has become strikingly obvious to me, and I suspect to most of us, is the fact that this pandemic has shown us just how much we took interpersonal human interaction for granted. I did not realise the profoundly negative effects isolation would have on me. I did not realise just how important collaborative work was in my overall experience as a grad student. When the lock-down was first announced back in mid-March, I _very naively_ thought that I could deal with it by myself. After all, it fits the stereotypical image of a programmer right? Hunched away at my desk, churning out line after line of code that no one (including myself sometimes!) really understood, but somehow just worked? Submitting assignments, attending classes and group meetings online, getting work done, it was all going to be very different, but not drastically more difficult, right?

{% include image.html url="/public/images/isolation.jpg" description="Credit: The New Yorker" %}

**WRONG**

You see, a lot of the work of a computer science student, or really anyone in the tech arena, is indeed individual. But it tends to cloud the fact that a lot of this individualism is born from collaborative effort. I hate to sound like an elitist MBA graduate, but team-work really is at the core of everything we do. In a group assignment, sitting together at a table with the other members of my group, drinking coffee and discussing how to approach the problem that we are tasked with solving, all of this was badly affected when we were all forced to attend meetings virtually instead of in person. Only then did I realise how stimulating a physical conversation was. Body language, hand gestures, even eye movements all have subtle, incalculable effects on the way we think, and there is years of psychological and sociological research to back this up. Humans are social animals is what I am trying to say.

What happens when all this physical communication is forcibly taken away (for good reason of course)?

{% include image.html url="/public/images/loneliness.jpg" description="Credit: AZ Big Media" %}

Loneliness. This one word encapsulates my experience better than any article or blog post ever could. Every day, I found myself feeling more and more lonely. This despite the fact that I was still very much in touch with friends and family, via Zoom or WhatsApp or what have you. I struggled to focus, struggled to code, and every online lecture felt like a never ending void of nameless, faceless voices droning on about big data, file systems, and what not. I found myself wishing, _craving_, a simple night out with my friends. Going for a drink, or just sitting by the lake, all these events felt like a utopian dream inside of a living nightmare.

The idea of going to sleep and never waking up was becoming more alluring by the day. I didn't have to suffer this alone, I could just peacefully drift off to sleep, and just... never wake up! Slowly but surely, however, I began to contemplate the idea that perhaps I was not the only one feeling this way. There **had** to be other people going through this, right? That's what all the preachy commercials were saying wasn't it? "We are all in this together". So I began to talk to my friends about this. I asked them "Do you feel like isolation just does not work for you?", and more often that not the answer was a resounding YES. Even highly introverted people were beginning to feel the effects.

You see, this isolation was not something we **chose**. In fact, it was quite the opposite, we had no choice in it. For our own well-being and for the well-being of others, especially the vulnerable ones among us, we had to stay at home and avoid interaction altogether. The mandatory aspect of this, more than anything, is what snowballed into negative implications for our collective mental health. Many people also confided in me that they were just better students and better employees when they had the opportunity to physically work with other people. The collaboration was something that drove them, empowered them to take decisions, to solve problems, and no matter how many "virtual meetups" they had, it did not even begin to come close to emulating real life human interaction.

I then began to ask myself, how do I overcome this? How do I help the people in my life get the better of this crippling sadness? Thankfully, there was light at the end of the tunnel, and for once, it wasn't a freight train.

{% include image.html url="/public/images/together.jpg" description="Credit: EAIE" %}

When the Dutch government announced that the lock-down would be partially lifted starting in August, I was overcome with joy. Finally, I could go out again! I could meet my friends! I could socialise (within reason of course). It was still a "new normal" but at least it wasn't complete and total isolation for months on end. I could shake hands and hug my friends again. I could sit at the same table with them, laugh, and have bitterballen and kaassouffle!

I could (and did) also re-assess my life. I realised that the people around me were **way** more important to me and my mental health than I could ever imagine. And during the course of this forced isolation, the silver lining was that I also grasped what was most important to me about **myself.** To cope with the extreme loneliness, I began to read and write more and more, which is something I have not done in nearly 6 years. I began to enjoy and appreciate music in a way I hadn't since my bachelors. I understood the value of the joy in watching the sun rise, which is something I never did before.

And that's the lesson I learned - the sun will always rise. Always. You just have to wait and watch, and never stop loving the people in your life, especially yourself.
